Welcome back everyone.
We already saw how to use a recurrent neural network for a very predictable series like a sine wave.
Let's go ahead and expand our understanding to work with a real time series data set one that has the
index actually as Date Time objects and we'll see how to work with it not just with recurrent Real Networks
of kerosene tensor flow but also how to use Panda's unique timestamp capabilities to forecast timestamp
points into the future.
Let's head to a notebook and get started okay.
Here I am at the notebook of.
I've already imported pandas and empire and map published.
Let's read in our dataset.
We're going to be working off a data set from Fred which is if we come here to the link it's the federal
economic database or Federal Reserve Economic database.
So what we have here is retail sales data for clothing and clothing accessory stores.
You can see that there's a very clear cycle and it looks like there's peaks around December which makes
sense because that's Christmas and holiday season here in the United States.
So we're going to see if the recurring year on that work can actually end up predicting the sort of
seasonality just based off the historical data points.
So we'll come back to our notebook.
Well let's read in that data it's saved for you already underneath this data folder.
So we'll say read in the Data folder and then has a bit of a strange name.
It's our SCC a SSN and just go ahead and read it.
And as such now if we just read it like this you'll notice the data frame produces this date and then
the actual value column.
And if we check out the information here the date is actually just read in as a string and we want it
to be a specific date timestamp so we can make sure that by adding two more things first I can say pass
dates is equal to true and panels will automatically look at strings that appear to be date times and
attempt to transform them into date time objects.
And then I actually want this date to be an index.
So I'll say index column is equal to and then it's called date.
So run that and Alfie run information again.
Notice there's only one column now.
And if we take a look at our actual index we have a date time index now.
So the data frame now looks something like this.
There's still just one column here except the index is now a date time index with the name date.
Let's go ahead and just for the sake of reference rename the columns to be sales that it's easier to
remember and let's go ahead and plot out the data.
So we should be able to recreate the plot that's on that Web site that we just visited and the notebook
that we provide for you has all the links and information.
So go out and run this and we can see the data quite clearly here.
Okay.
So pretty much we're going to follow the exact same steps we did last time.
So what we have to do is we have to decide where we're going to do our train test split and for something
like this it's a lot more obvious where you should be doing your train test split.
We should be doing a split at least a year's worth of information because there's clearly a yearly cycle
here.
We should try to forecast at least one of these seasonality.
So we're going to do is let's go ahead and choose a little more than a year will choose one point five
years or essentially 18 months.
So we check the length of my data frame.
Notice it's three hundred and thirty four.
And if you look at these timestamps from the original data frame if we just show it here it's monthly
data.
So we have the year the month and the day.
So we're going from month to month.
So that means twelve rows is one year.
So that means 18 rows is going to be one and a half years.
So say the length of my data frame minus 18 is three sixteen.
So we'll go ahead and say my test index is the length of my data frame minus and we'll go ahead and
say test size that way we can edit this in the feature case we want to play around a fit but I'll say
18 months is my test size.
So now I have my test index and just as before we're just going to use this integer based location and
say starting for the beginning all the way to my test index and then test the f I LFC starting out my
test index go all the way to the end and I can see my training data goes from 1992 to 2018 sometime
in April and then my test data starts the very next month in May of 2018 and then goes all the way to
October of 2019.
OK so the next step is to scale our data just as we did with that sign you saw it all data and we can
do this pretty easily by saying from S.K. learn the pre processing import min max scalar run that and
then we'll say scalar is equal to an instance of minimum scalar.
And just as before we only want to fit to our training data because we don't want to assume that we'll
have information about the future a dataset so we'll fit to our training data.
Keep in mind you may get a warning here.
That's totally ok and then we're going to do is create the scaled versions of our data.
We have the scale training data which is scalar that transform train and then we'll have our scaled
test data which is scalar that transform test.
OK.
The scaling is done.
Now it's time to actually create our time series generator.
Hopefully everything here feels really familiar given what we went over in the previous sine wave lectures
let's import that time series generator.
It's from tensor flow that carries that pre processing the sequence import time series generator and
you should be using tab autocomplete just in case you do any typos here you can only just copy and paste
from our notebook as well.
And so we're going to do is let's go ahead and start defining our batches now something to keep in mind
here is I will add an early stopping and a validation generator because of that I need to make sure
that my actual length of my batch is less than the length of my test set.
So recall that my current test set right now is 18 months so I cannot feed a batch of 18 months and
then expect to get a prediction of the 19th month with my test set.
So my batches should be shorter than 18.
Now they can be 17 16 13 whatever you want.
However a pretty reasonable choice then for the length of my batch would be twelve months because that's
a whole year so we have length is equal to 12.
And again the length here this represents the length of the actual batches.
So let's create a generator and make sure we understand all of this.
So we say Time series generator just as we did before and the source of the X points comes from skilled
train the source of the y points is also coming from our scale training data and then the length for
our batch is going to be equal to the length we just described here 12 months.
And as far as how many we're going to be passing in at a time it will just be one.
So we'll go ahead and run that.
Let's take a look at what the very first batch looks like just to remind ourselves what's actually happening
here we say generator of zero is equal to x y run that.
And then what we're going to say is given the array of X and remember the skilled version zeroes or
point two etc. This is going up.
And notice even has that seasonality comes back down because back up again et cetera.
And then what we want to do is predict that next value Okay so if we take a look at our skilled training
set you can see in the beginning here we have those same values.
And then right after zero point four one.
So if we scroll down to zero point for one we started you know that seasonally come down to zero point
zero two.
And there it is.
Okay.
So given this batch and if we take a look at the length of X here what's the length of.
So it has double dimensions that the length of the X inside.
Notice that it's 12.
So it's basically saying given the length of 12 months.
Going to predict that 13th month okay.
So we understand X and Y.
It's essentially the exact same idea that we had before the sine wave.
So what we need to do is we'll go ahead and create our model and then we will add in the early stopping
by creating a validation generator and then we can evaluate our model.
So we're going to do is in the very next lecture we'll finish creating the model get that early stopping
callback create the validation generator and then evaluate our model's performance.
If you have any questions on this make sure to check out our notebook and also make sure to just understand
what these variables are actually representing the length is the length of the batch here the batch
size is the fact that we're just essentially getting one array for X and one array or one value for
y if you're to change this to something like two then you would get two sets for X and two sets for
YS but in my experience when it comes to time series sequences it really works best with a batch size
of one but there's not a hundred percent correct answer here you can always experiment thanks and we'll
see you at the next lecture recreate the model and begin to evaluate the model.